docs/cli/cron.md, before:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw cron` (schedule and run background jobs)"
read_when:
  - You want scheduled jobs and wakeups
  - You’re debugging cron execution and logs
title: "cron"
---

# `openclaw cron`

Manage cron jobs for the Gateway scheduler.

Related:

- Cron jobs: [Cron jobs](/automation/cron-jobs)

Tip: run `openclaw cron --help` for the full command surface.

Note: isolated `cron add` jobs default to `--announce` delivery. Use `--deliver` for full output
or `--no-deliver` to keep output internal. To opt into the legacy main-summary path, pass
`--post-prefix` (or other `--post-*` options) without delivery flags.

Note: one-shot (`--at`) jobs delete after success by default. Use `--keep-after-run` to keep them.

## Common edits

Update delivery settings without changing the message:

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --announce --channel telegram --to "123456789"
```

Disable delivery for an isolated job:

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --no-deliver
```

Deliver full output (instead of announce):

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --deliver --channel slack --to "channel:C1234567890"
```

Commit message:

feat(cron): enhance delivery modes and job configuration
- Updated isolated cron jobs to support new delivery modes: `announce` and `none`, improving output management.
- Refactored job configuration to remove legacy fields and streamline delivery settings.
- Enhanced the `CronJobEditor` UI to reflect changes in delivery options, including a new segmented control for delivery mode selection.
- Updated documentation to clarify the new delivery configurations and their implications for job execution.
- Improved tests to validate the new delivery behavior and ensure backward compatibility with legacy settings.

This update provides users with greater flexibility in managing how isolated jobs deliver their outputs, enhancing overall usability and clarity in job configurations.

docs/cli/cron.md, after:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `openclaw cron` (schedule and run background jobs)"
read_when:
  - You want scheduled jobs and wakeups
  - You’re debugging cron execution and logs
title: "cron"
---

# `openclaw cron`

Manage cron jobs for the Gateway scheduler.

Related:

- Cron jobs: [Cron jobs](/automation/cron-jobs)

Tip: run `openclaw cron --help` for the full command surface.

Note: isolated `cron add` jobs default to `--announce` delivery. Use `--no-deliver` to keep
output internal. `--deliver` remains as a deprecated alias for `--announce`.

Note: one-shot (`--at`) jobs delete after success by default. Use `--keep-after-run` to keep them.

## Common edits

Update delivery settings without changing the message:

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --announce --channel telegram --to "123456789"
```

Disable delivery for an isolated job:

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --no-deliver
```

Announce to a specific channel:

```bash
openclaw cron edit <job-id> --announce --channel slack --to "channel:C1234567890"
```
