docs/web/dashboard.md, before:

---
summary: "Gateway dashboard (Control UI) access and auth"
read_when:
  - Changing dashboard authentication or exposure modes
title: "Dashboard"
---

# Dashboard (Control UI)

The Gateway dashboard is the browser Control UI served at `/` by default
(override with `gateway.controlUi.basePath`).

Quick open (local Gateway):

- http://127.0.0.1:18789/ (or http://localhost:18789/)

Key references:

- [Control UI](/web/control-ui) for usage and UI capabilities.
- [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale) for Serve/Funnel automation.
- [Web surfaces](/web) for bind modes and security notes.

Authentication is enforced at the WebSocket handshake via `connect.params.auth`
(token or password). See `gateway.auth` in [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration).

Security note: the Control UI is an **admin surface** (chat, config, exec approvals).
Do not expose it publicly. The UI stores the token in `localStorage` after first load.
Prefer localhost, Tailscale Serve, or an SSH tunnel.

## Fast path (recommended)

- After onboarding, the CLI now auto-opens the dashboard with your token and prints the same tokenized link.
- Re-open anytime: `openclaw dashboard` (copies link, opens browser if possible, shows SSH hint if headless).
- The token stays local (query param only); the UI strips it after first load and saves it in localStorage.

## Token basics (local vs remote)

- **Localhost**: open `http://127.0.0.1:18789/`. If you see “unauthorized,” run `openclaw dashboard` and use the tokenized link (`?token=...`).
- **Token source**: `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`); the UI stores it after first load.
- **Not localhost**: use Tailscale Serve (tokenless if `gateway.auth.allowTailscale: true`), tailnet bind with a token, or an SSH tunnel. See [Web surfaces](/web).

## If you see “unauthorized” / 1008

- Run `openclaw dashboard` to get a fresh tokenized link.
- Ensure the gateway is reachable (local: `openclaw status`; remote: SSH tunnel `ssh -N -L 18789:127.0.0.1:18789 user@host` then open `http://127.0.0.1:18789/?token=...`).
- In the dashboard settings, paste the same token you configured in `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).

Commit message:

fix: silence unused hook token url param (#9436)
* fix: Gateway authentication token exposed in URL query parameters

* fix: silence unused hook token url param

* fix: remove gateway auth tokens from URLs (#9436) (thanks @coygeek)

* test: fix Windows path separators in audit test (#9436)

---------

Co-authored-by: George Pickett <[redacted-email]>

docs/web/dashboard.md, after:

---
summary: "Gateway dashboard (Control UI) access and auth"
read_when:
  - Changing dashboard authentication or exposure modes
title: "Dashboard"
---

# Dashboard (Control UI)

The Gateway dashboard is the browser Control UI served at `/` by default
(override with `gateway.controlUi.basePath`).

Quick open (local Gateway):

- http://127.0.0.1:18789/ (or http://localhost:18789/)

Key references:

- [Control UI](/web/control-ui) for usage and UI capabilities.
- [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale) for Serve/Funnel automation.
- [Web surfaces](/web) for bind modes and security notes.

Authentication is enforced at the WebSocket handshake via `connect.params.auth`
(token or password). See `gateway.auth` in [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration).

Security note: the Control UI is an **admin surface** (chat, config, exec approvals).
Do not expose it publicly. The UI stores the token in `localStorage` after first load.
Prefer localhost, Tailscale Serve, or an SSH tunnel.

## Fast path (recommended)

- After onboarding, the CLI auto-opens the dashboard and prints a clean (non-tokenized) link.
- Re-open anytime: `openclaw dashboard` (copies link, opens browser if possible, shows SSH hint if headless).
- If the UI prompts for auth, paste the token from `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`) into Control UI settings.

## Token basics (local vs remote)

- **Localhost**: open `http://127.0.0.1:18789/`.
- **Token source**: `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`); the UI stores a copy in localStorage after you connect.
- **Not localhost**: use Tailscale Serve (tokenless if `gateway.auth.allowTailscale: true`), tailnet bind with a token, or an SSH tunnel. See [Web surfaces](/web).

## If you see “unauthorized” / 1008

- Ensure the gateway is reachable (local: `openclaw status`; remote: SSH tunnel `ssh -N -L 18789:127.0.0.1:18789 user@host` then open `http://127.0.0.1:18789/`).
- Retrieve the token from the gateway host: `openclaw config get gateway.auth.token` (or generate one: `openclaw doctor --generate-gateway-token`).
- In the dashboard settings, paste the token into the auth field, then connect.
